---
title: "Setting up U-Boot booting environment"
description: >-
  Booting system with U-Boot, Trusted Firmware ARM, emulate boot flow with qemu.

author: Cong
date: 2025-04-17 00:01:00 +0800
categories: [bootloader, uboot]
tags: [bootloader, uboot, aarch64]
published: false
---

## Objective

- Understand how second stage bootloader loads u-boot.
- Understand how u-boot loads kernel, initrd, device tree.
- Emulate full system with QEMU.
- Use TFA to load u-boot.

## 1. Loading U-Boot

The main U-Boot binary may be too large to be loaded by the Boot ROM.

### 1.1. Image load methods

#### 1.1.1. Loading from raw flash devices

## 2. Environment variables

U-Boot uses environment variables to keep the source code as generic as possible. These environment can be stored in several locations, depends on building configuration.

- NOR/NAND flash memory.
- eMMC/SD card.
- SPI flash.
- EEPROM.
- RAM.
- Or ENV in the boot FAT/ext4 filesystem.

The location is defined at the config file, for example, `qemu_arm64_defconfig`:

```text
# CONFIG_ENV_IS_IN_EEPROM is not set
# CONFIG_ENV_IS_IN_FAT is not set
# CONFIG_ENV_IS_IN_EXT4 is not set
CONFIG_ENV_IS_IN_FLASH=y
# CONFIG_ENV_IS_IN_NAND is not set
# CONFIG_ENV_IS_IN_NVRAM is not set
# CONFIG_ENV_IS_IN_REMOTE is not set
```

The config file also tell u-boot how to loads these variables:

```text
CONFIG_ENV_SOURCE_FILE=""
CONFIG_ENV_SIZE=0x40000
CONFIG_ENV_SECT_SIZE=0x40000
CONFIG_ENV_ADDR=0x4000000
```

You can also load env variables at runtime by using `setenv`, `printenv` commands, and `env_get()`, `env_set()`, `saveenv()` in C.

### 2.1. Environment variable purposes

U-Boot support variety kind of booting. These environment variables are used to control boot behavior: how the system boots, what it boots, and where from.

### 2.2. Boot configuration

`bootcmd` is used to store boot commands that are run if the user does not enter the shell. This example load kernel image from mmc device 0, partition 1 and then call `bootz` to boot kernel with fdt address:

```text
setenv boot_linux 'ext4load mmc 0:1 ${kernel_addr_r} /boot/zImage; bootz ${kernel_addr_r} - ${fdt_addr_r}'
setenv bootcmd 'run boot_linux'
```

`bootargs` is used to specify kernel command line.

`boot_targets` this variable list devices to scan, used by `bootflow` command to specify list of device and order to scan.

### 2.3. Kernel/image locations

- `kernel_addr_r`, `fdt_addr_r`, `ramdisk_addr_r` -- RAM addresses to load kernel, DTB, and initrd.
- `kernel_addr`, `fdt_addr`, `ramdisk_addr` -- Flash locations that kernel, DTB, and initrd are stored.
- `*_high` -- restrict positioning of images.

For example:

```text
fdt_addr=0x40000000
fdt_high=0xffffffff
initrd_high=0xffffffff
kernel_addr_r=0x40400000
loadaddr=0x40200000
pxefile_addr_r=0x40300000
ramdisk_addr_r=0x44000000
scriptaddr=0x40200000
```

### 2.4. Device/Filesystem booting

- `root`, `mmcdev`, `mmcroot`, `mmcpart` -- Define rootfs location and MMC partition.
- `ethaddr`, `ipaddr`, `serverip` -- Used for network booting (e.g., TFTP, NFS).

### 2.5. hardware configuration

- `baudrate`, `stdin`, `stdout`, `stderr` -- Serial console settings.
- `ethaddr` -- MAC address.
- `serial#` -- Device serial number.

## 3. Booting system

By default, if the user don't enter shell, uboot read the `bootcmd` to perform booting. There several methods to boot:

- `boot` -- Boot default, i.e., run 'bootcmd'.
- `bootd` -- Boot default, i.e., run 'bootcmd'.
- `bootdev` -- Boot devices.
- `bootefi`-- Boots an EFI payload from memory.
- `bootelf`-- Boot from an ELF image in memory.
- `bootflow` -- Boot flows.
- `booti` -- Boot Linux kernel 'Image' format from memory.
- `bootm` -- Boot application image from memory.
- `bootmeth` -- Boot methods.
- `bootp` -- Boot image via network using BOOTP/TFTP protocol.
- `bootstd` -- Standard-boot operation.
- `bootvx` -- Boot vxWorks from an ELF image.
- `bootz` -- Boot Linux zImage image from memory.

### 3.1. `bootflow` method

This method is one of the newest introduced in newer U-boot versions. It's used for:

- Auto-discovering bootable devices and partitions.
- Automatically finding boot scripts, kernel image, and dtb.
- Generic booting method across platforms.

```bash
=> help bootflow
bootflow - Boot flows

Usage:
bootflow scan [-abeGl] [bdev]  - scan for valid bootflows (-l list, -a all, -e errors, -b boot, -G no global)
bootflow list [-e]             - list scanned bootflows (-e errors)
bootflow select [<num>|<name>] - select a bootflow
bootflow info [-ds]            - show info on current bootflow (-d dump bootflow)
bootflow read                  - read all current-bootflow files
bootflow boot                  - boot current bootflow
bootflow menu [-t]             - show a menu of available bootflows
bootflow cmdline [set|get|clear|delete|auto] <param> [<value>] - update cmdline
```

This command read the variable `boot_targets` for list of devices. Some way to boot:

- `bootflow scan -b` -- Scan in the list, and boot if meet the first bootable one.
- `bootflow select  [<num>|<name>]` -- select device to boot and then boot with `bootflow boot`.

For example, simple setup that scan the list `qfw usb scsi virtio nvme dhcp` in order and perform booting:

```text
boot_targets=qfw usb scsi virtio nvme dhcp
bootcmd=bootflow scan -lb
```

> `qfw` is QEMU firmware information command, only supported when running on QEMU.
{: .prompt-info }

### 3.2. Boot configuration files

The standard format for boot configuration files is that of `extlinux.conf`, as handled by U-Boot's `syslinux` (disk) or `pxe boot` (network).

The boot method with extlinux is enabled by `CONFIG_BOOTMETH_EXTLINUX=y`. U-boot scans the device list in `boot_targets` one by one and looking for the configure file `/boot/extlinux/extlinux.conf`. It then try to parse the config files and load images, if some error occurs, u-boot scans for the next device.

#### 3.2.1. `extlinux.conf` format

This file follow the syslinux format that contains boot information and:

- Kernel image.
- Device Tree.
- Initrd.
- Kernel command lines.

```text
DEFAULT linux
TIMEOUT 5

LABEL linux
  KERNEL /boot/vmlinuz
  INITRD /boot/initrd.img
  APPEND root=/dev/sda1 quiet
```

### 3.3. Booting with EFI

When built with EFI support, U-Boot acts like a UEFI firmware (For more detail about EFI, visit this blog [Bootloader UEFI](/posts/Build-A-x86-Bootloader-UEFI/)):

- Start and initializes devices (mmc, usb, virtio, etc.).
- Scan for ESP partition.
- Try to run `EFI/BOOT/BOOTAA64.EFI` (file name depends on architecture).
- The bootloader and then taking care all the rest.

For example:

```bash
fatload mmc 0:1 ${loadaddr} /EFI/BOOT/BOOTAA64.EFI
bootefi ${loadaddr} $fdtcontroladdr
```

Or Let U-Boot automatically use EFI bootmgr:

```bash
bootefi bootmgr
```
