---
title: "Yocto"
description: >-
  Yocto

author: Cong
date: 2025-04-04 00:01:00 +0800
categories: [build system, yocto]
tags: [yocto, bsp, kernel, bootloader]
published: false
---

## 1. Objective

## 2. Reference Manual

### 2.1. Terms

- OE -- OpenEmbedded build system. The build system is based another project known as `Poky`, which uses `Bitbake` as the task executor.
- Append Files -- Files that append build information to a recipe file, known as Bitbake append files and `.bbappend` files. the append and the recipe files should have the same root file name, for example: `formfactor_0.0.bb` and `formfactor_0.0.bbappend`.
- Bitbake -- task executor and scheduler used by OE (like Make is used by CMake).
- Board Support Package (BSP) -- A group of drivers, definitions, and other components that provide support for a specific hardware configuration.
- Build Directory -- area used by the OE for builds. The area is created when you `source` the setup env script, for ex, `oe-init-build-env`.
- Buildtools -- build tools in binary form: git, gcc, python, make, etc.
- Classes -- files that provide logic encapsulation and inheritance so that commonly used patterns can be defined once and then easily used in multiple recipes. End with `.bbclass`.
- Configuration file -- files that hold global definitions of variables, user-defined variables, and hardware configuration info. These files tell the OE what to build and what to put into the image to support a particular platform.
- Image -- An image is an artifact of the Bitbake build process given a collection of recipes and related Metadata. Are the binary output that run on specific hardware or QEMU.
- Initramfs -- An Initial RAM FS is an optionally compressed cpio archive which is extracted by the Linux kernel into RAM, used as the initial root file system.
- Layer -- A collection of related recipes.
- Metadata -- Include recipes, configuration files, and other information that refers to the build instructions themselves.
- OpenEmbedded-Core (OE-Core) -- is metadata comprised of foundation recipes, classes, and associated files that are meant to be common among many different OpenEmbedded-derived systems including Yocto project.
- Poky -- is a reference embedded distribution and a reference test configuration.
- Recipe -- A set of instructions for building packages. A recipe describes where you get source code, which patches to apply, how to configure the source, how to compile it and so on. Describe dependencies for libraries or for other recipes. Use `.bb` as file extension.
- Source Directory -- the directory structure created as a result of creating a local copy of the `poky` git repo.
- Sysroot -- When cross compiling, the target file system may be differently laid out and contain different things compared to the host system. The `sysroot` is directory which looks like the target filesystem and can be used to cross-compile against.
- Task -- A per-recipe unit of execution for Bitbake (for ex, `do_compile`, `do_fetch`, `do_patch`). Each recipe can spawn the execution of numerous tasks. Tasks can execute in parallel.
- Upstream -- A reference to the source code or repositories that are not local to the development system but located in a remote area.

### 2.2. Source directory structure

- `bitbake/` -- includes a copy of BitBake for ease of use.
- `build/` -- Default build directory, if `source oe-init-build-env` without folder.
- `meta/` -- contains the minimal, underlying OE-Core metadata. Hold recipes, common classes and machine configuration for strictly emulated targets (`qemux86`, `qemuarm`, etc.).
- `meta-poky/` -- designed above the `meta/` content, add just enough metadata to define the Poky reference distribution.
- `meta-yocto-bsp/` -- contains the Yocto Project reference hardware Board Support Packages (BSPs).
- `meta-self-test/` -- Adds additional recipes and appends files used by the OE self tests to verify the behavior of the build system.
- `meta-skeleton/` -- Contains template recipes for BSP and kernel development.
- `scripts/` -- Extra functionality in the Yocto Project env.
- `oe-init-build-env` -- Setup the OE build env.

#### 2.2.1. build directory

- `cache/` -- several internal files used by the OE.
- `conf/local.conf` -- All the local user configurations for your build env.
- `conf/bblayers.conf` -- defines layers, which are directory trees, traversed by Bitbake. Use the `BBLAYERS` variable to list the layers BitBake tries to find.
- `downloads/` -- Contains downloaded upstream source tarballs. You can reuse for multiple builds.
- `sstate-cache/` -- contains the shared state cache.
- `tmp/` -- OE creates and uses this for all build system's output.

### 2.3. Classes

### 2.4. Tasks

#### 2.4.1. Normal tasks

- `do_build` -- default tasks for all recipes. Depends on all other normal tasks required to build a recipe.
- `do_compile` -- Compiles the source code. Default of this task is to run `oe_runmake` function if a makefile (`Makefile`, `makefile`, or `GNUmakefile`) is found. Otherwise, do nothing.
- `do_configure` -- Configures the source by enabling and disabling any build-time and configuration options for the software. Default behavior of this task is to run `oe_runmake clean`.
- `do_deploy` -- Writes output files that are to be deployed to `${DEPLOY_DIR_IMAGE}`.
- `do_fetch` -- Fetches the source code, use `SRC_URI` variable and the argument's prefix to determine the correct fetcher module.
- `do_image` -- Start the image generation process. The `do_image` run after OE run `do_rootfs`.
- `do_install` -- Copies files that are to be packaged into the holding area `${D}`.
- `do_package` -- Analyzes the content of the holding area `${D}` and splits the content into subsets based on available packages and files.
- `do_patch` -- Locates patch files and applies them to the source code.
- `do_populate_sysroot` -- Stages (Copies) a subset of the files installed by the `do_install` task into the appropriate sysroot.

#### 2.4.2. Manually Called Tasks

- `do_checkuri` -- Validate `SRC_URI`.
- `do_clean` -- Removes all output files for a target.
- `do_cleansstate` -- Removes all output files and shared state (sstate) cache for a target.

#### 2.4.3. Image-Related Tasks

- `do_bootimg` -- Creates a bootable live image by this variable `IMAGE_FSTYPES`.
- `do_bundle_initramfs` -- Bundle initramfs and kernel.
- `do_rootfs` -- Creates the root filesystem for an image.

#### 2.4.4. Kernel-Related Tasks

- `do_compile_kernelmodules` -- Runs the step that builds the kernel modules (if needed).
- `do_kernel_menuconfig` -- manipulate the `.config` file used to build a linux-yocto recipe.
- `do_kernel_metadata` -- Collects all the features required for a given kernel build.
- `do_menuconfig` -- run `make menuconfig` for the kernel.

### 2.6. Variables

- `AR` -- Minimal command to run `ar`.
- `AS` -- Minimal command to run assembler.
- `B` -- Build directory.

## 3. Board Support Package Developer's guide

A BSP is a collection of information that defines how to support a particular hardware device, set of devices, or hardware platform.

### 3.1. BSP Layers

BSP layers naming convention: `meta-bsp_root_name`.

> Some BSPs are supported by Yocto, [Yocto Metadata layers](https://web.git.yoctoproject.org/). Each repository is a BSP layer (e.g. `meta-raspberrypi`, `meta-intel`). Each of these layers is a repository unto itself. For example, clone meta-raspberrypi BSP as an template: `git clone git://git.yoctoproject.org/meta-raspberrypi`.
{: .prompt-info }

In addition to BSP layers, the `meta-yocto-bsp` layer is part of the Poky. That maintains several *reference* BSPs including the ARM-based Beaglebone and 32-bit and 64-bit IA machines.

The BSP layer's base directory need to be added to the `BBLAYERS` variable in `conf/bblayers.conf`, for example:

```text
BBLAYERS ?= " \
   /usr/local/src/yocto/meta \
   /usr/local/src/yocto/meta-poky \
   /usr/local/src/yocto/meta-yocto-bsp \
   /usr/local/src/yocto/meta-mylayer \
   "
```

### 3.2. Example Filesystem layout

Typical directory structure for a BSP layer:

```text
meta-bsp_root_name/
meta-bsp_root_name/bsp_license_file
meta-bsp_root_name/README
meta-bsp_root_name/README.sources
meta-bsp_root_name/binary/bootable_images
meta-bsp_root_name/conf/layer.conf
meta-bsp_root_name/conf/machine/*.conf
meta-bsp_root_name/recipes-bsp/*
meta-bsp_root_name/recipes-core/*
meta-bsp_root_name/recipes-graphics/*
meta-bsp_root_name/recipes-kernel/linux/linux-yocto_kernel_rev.bbappend
```

- README contains information on how to boot the live images that are optionally included in the `binary/`.

#### 3.2.1. Layer config file

Layer config file `meta-bsp_root_name/conf/layer.conf` contains information about how the build system should use it. A standard like this:

```text
# We have a conf and classes directory, append to BBPATH
BBPATH .= ":${LAYERDIR}"

# We have a recipes directory containing .bb and .bbappend files, add to BBFILES
BBFILES += "${LAYERDIR}/recipes*/*/*.bb \
            ${LAYERDIR}/recipes*/*/*.bbappend"

BBFILE_COLLECTIONS += "bsp_root_name"
BBFILE_PATTERN_bsp_root_name := "^${LAYERDIR}/"
BBFILE_PRIORITY_bsp_root_name = "9"

# Additional license directories.
LICENSE_PATH += "${LAYERDIR}/files/custom-licenses"
.
.
.
```

#### 3.2.2. Hardware config options

These machine files `meta-bsp_root_name/conf/machine/*.conf`. Each BSP layer require at least one machine file. If the BSP supports multiple machines, multiple machine configuration files can exist. These filenames correspond to the values to which users have set the `MACHINE` variable.

This config file could also include a hardware tuning file that is commonly used to define the package architecture and specify optimization flags. For example: `include conf/machine/include/rpi-base.inc`.

#### 3.2.3. BSP specific recipe files

`meta-bsp_root_name/recipes-bsp/*`

#### 3.2.4. Linux kernel configuration

`meta-bsp_root_name/recipes-kernel/linux/linux*.bbappend`
`meta-bsp_root_name/recipes-kernel/linux/*.bb`

Append files `*.bbappend` modify the main kernel recipe being used to build image.
The `*.bb` files would be a developer-supplied kernel recipe.

### 3.3. Developing a BSP

## 4. Linux Kernel development manual
